remember the idea of shoulder health so
what are some good shoulder Health
exercises external rotation what does
external rotations do and why do I want
to do external rotations on our upper
body Push Pull day the main muscles
involved in pressing PEC and deltoids if
we understand the attachment point we
have our sternal portion and our
clavicular portion so that's the origin
and they attach right here at the front
of the humorus and when they contract
what's the action they cause flexion
horizontal adduction internal rotation
and if there's no opposing muscles
dislocation but we do have opposing
muscles that's it's good to train them
as well so that's what it means to have
stabilizers opposing muscles that
stabilize The Joint so therefore our
heavy pressing leaves us internally
rotated now let's think about our
biggest muscles that we train on our
pull-ups pull downs and rows what are
they the lats where do the lats attach
top of the pelvis through thol Lumar
fascia come up underneath the arm and
attach to the front of the humoris lats
inner lip of the bical groove PEC outer
lip of the Bal Groove both of them when
they contract they pull those two bones
together so from the pelvis to the front
of the humoris pulls that together and
creates what so there's a few actions
shoulder joint extension ad duction and
internal rotation Okay so we've done our
Push Pull ratio of 1: one which leaves
us balanced but how else does that leave
us internally rotated so this is why a
rehabilitation protocol for most people
is to include external rotation
exercises what are the muscles that
externally rotate the shoulder it's not
just the rotator cuff what are the three
muscles that externally rotate the
shoulder infraspinatus teris minor not
major teris major is lat the Little
Helper does the same things that lats do
pretty much and that's not a rotat cuff
muscle so Terry's Miner and
infraspinatus as well as the posterior
fibers of the deltoid so think of the
size difference of those little muscles
compared to the big lats and the big
peegs so that's a good reason to include
some external rotation exercises no you
can't load them with heavy weights and
there's always going to be some type of
an imbalance especially when you
consider the size okay but that's why we
train external rotators and it's not
just rotator cuff it's external rotators
so when we do rotator cuff let's think
about where the rotat cuff is what bone
does a rotat cuff sit on scapula let's
think about the scapula how many rotat
cuff muscles are there four here's an
acronym for you to remember sits let's
go through all of them so this is the
spine of the scapula superior to the
spine of the scapula sits what
supraspinatus inferior to the spine of
the scapula sits what infraspinatus
underneath that is the Terri's minor and
underneath the scapula the way that we
remember this just like underneath the
water sits what submarine so
subscapularis okay so supraspinatus
infraspinatus teres minor subscapularis
sits they are not all external rotators
they all have different individual
functions which I'll go through but they
all have one main function the
individual function what we need to
consider when we understand a muscle's
job is to get the attachment points the
origin and insertion when the muscles
contract it pulls those two points
together so when we think of the origin
of all of these muscles it's the scapula
so the origin of the infraspinatus and
teres minor is here and it attaches
right here on the humoris okay so when
those muscles contract inpan Cent minor
it pulls those two parts together
creating what external rotation now
let's have a look at the muscle that
sits superior to the spine of the
scapula which is what supraspinatus okay
comes it passes through under the
acromium and attaches at the top of the
humorous here or the side of the humorus
I should say and when that muscle
contracts what action does it create
abduction then we go to the
subscapularis which sits under the
scapula kind of under the armpit like
this and attaches to the front of the
humoris and when that muscle contracts
what action does it create internal
rotation great now here's the thing with
the rotator cuff muscles okay the best
job for the rotat cuff muscles to do
isn't external rotation a reduction
internal rotation yes it does that but
their main role is to work together to
stabilize the head of the humorus okay
so that's the ball inside the center of
the glenoid fossa or the socket so it
remains in the center so the big pushing
and pulling muscles the big peex lats
deltoids can do all sorts of amazing
things pushing punching throwing and all
of these things and the rotat cuff
muscle keep the head of the humorus
inside the center of that glenoid fer or
the head of the ball inside of the
center of the socket now what's the
problem with shoulder health and blaming
the rotator cuff on every shoulder
problem which is a very common thing a
lot of people have strong rotat cuff
muscles the scapula moves around a lot
for the rotate a cuff to do its job
correctly in holding the head of the
humoris in place it needs a very stable
base of support so the scapula moves
around a lot and we need to use our
strong muscles to keep it in place to
stabilize that bone what are the muscles
that stabilize that scapula all the
muscles that attach to it what are those
those midback muscles what are they
trapezius and rhomboids okay we've got
other muscles that attach to it as well
Lev scapula what does the Lev scapula do
elevates yeah so shrugs okay we've got
our biceps attached to the scapula our
triceps attached to the scapula a few
other muscles attached to the scapula
they will stabilize it as well
underneath the scapula okay there's a
muscle that holds that scapula in place
what's that it also protracts the
scapula seratus anterior okay so we can
have the strongest rotat cuff muscles in
the world but if those muscles that
attached to it aren't doing their job in
stabilizing that scapula the shoulder
pain isn't coming from a weak rotator
cuff in fact a lot of people are weak in
certain areas like SRA anterior and our
midback muscles because most people do
things like work in an office all day
where our scapular are protracted which
stretch the hell out of those middle and
low trapezius and our midback muscles
and they end up being weak and causing
shoulder pain yeah cool we've got
shoulder Health exercise external
rotation fantastic what else can we
consider for healthy shoulders strong
midback muscles okay strong catus
anterior how do we strengthen those rows
pull ups and pull Downs performed
correctly so why do I say performed
correctly general population lifter who
sits in front front of a computer all
day long that has this posture with
stretched midback muscles rounded
shoulders protracted scapula how do they
perform their Rose pull-ups and pull
Downs they don't use those muscles
they've trained themselves not to use
all day long so those individuals need
to be educated on how to retract and
depress the scapula which is the actions
of those midback muscles so don't just
write a program where we say go and do
rows and pull-ups and pull downs and
that'll fix your shoulders those
individuals need to be taught how to use
their rhomboids and trapezius correctly
okay so that's why I look for for those
cues with my rose pull-ups and pull
Downs full stretch where the scapula is
protract protract and Elevate and then a
full contraction where the scapula
retracts and depresses this is the best
exercise that we have for those midback
muscles yes we have isolation exercises
to Target those as well like what face
pulls great exercises what about the
sadus anterior what are some fantastic
exercises for sratus anterior great so
we've got sratus anterior raise people
call it a liberty raise standing like
the Statue of Liberty right where I like
to kind of push the arm about 45°
reaching out with like a dumbbell okay
so this is the action that I'm creating
here at that scapula is what protraction
which is one of the actions of the
seratus anterior what's another way of
strengthening seratus anterior other
great exercise for seratus anterior
protraction push-ups so doing a push-up
and then not just finishing with the
elbows locked emphasizing the
protraction component same with dips
protraction dips fliers will protract
the scapula okay and so will all of our
dumbbell pressing on all angles dumbbell
presses on all angles strengthen the
hell out of the seratus anterior so yes
we've got some amazing isolation
exercises but don't look past those
compound movements performed correctly